The Lord Chamberlain walked busily among the courtiers assembled in the main hall, fussing about the arrangements, making sure that everyone was in his or her place. He had summoned two lords, Voltimand and Cornelius, because the king wished to send them on an important mission. His son, Laertes, was there too. There had been some tension between them because Laertes wanted to return to Paris. He had come to Elsinore for the funeral of the late King Hamlet but he was missing the life he had made for himself in Paris. The Lord Chamberlain disapproved of his son's Parisian lifestyle and was considering opposing his departure, which required King Claudius' permission.

The great doors opened. The trumpeters raised their instruments and played a fanfare. The king and queen swept in, followed by the queen's son, Prince Hamlet. The royal couple were splendidly dressed in colourful robes of state. Hamlet wore a black mourning suit.

The king and queen mounted the dais and sat down on their chairs of state. Hamlet joined the courtiers as they stood facing them, and stared at his uncle.

Claudius stood to address the assembly.

'Although the memory of our dear brother Hamlet's death is still green,' he began, 'and although we have mourned him in company with all our subjects, we should now find a balance. We should temper our public sorrow and remember him privately as we return to the consideration of our normal affairs. Therefore our former sister, now our queen, our imperial partner in the conduct of this warlike nation, we have, as it were, with mixed emotions, married. It was something of a low key wedding, with some happiness in the face of a funeral, and pain on the occasion of a marriage, in equal measure, weighing delight and solemnity. Nor have we declined to take your advice, which fully supported this marriage.'


He bowed graciously, embracing the company with a warm smile. 'For all that, our thanks.'

He became businesslike. 'Now. You know that Fortinbras, the young Norwegian prince, underestimating us, thinks that because of our late dear brother's death our state is in disarray. That, together with what he imagines to be his military superiority, inspires him to pester us with the demand that we surrender those lands that his father lost, quite legally, to our most brave brother.' He snapped his fingers. 'So much for him. Now, as for ourself and the reason for this meeting: this is what the business is: we have written to the king of Norway, the uncle of young Fortinbras. He is weak and bedridden and doesn't know what his nephew is up to so he's unable to check him. He doesn't know that his nephew is using his resources to build up his own army. Therefore we are sending you, good Cornelius, and you Voltimand, to take this letter to old Norway, giving you no further personal power to do business with the king other than the instructions set out in detail here. Farewell, and let your haste show your sense of duty.'

The ambassadors went forward and took the letter. They bowed and assured the king that they would show their duty in all things.

Claudius nodded graciously. 'We don't doubt that. With all our heart, farewell.'

When they had gone the king beckoned to Laertes, smiling to put him at his ease.

'And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?' he said. 'You told us of some suit. What is it, Laertes?' Laertes cleared his throat and Claudius smiled more broadly. 'If you want to speak reason to the Dane you mustn't lose your voice. What could you ask, Laertes, that I wouldn't give you? The head and the heart, the hand and the mouth, don't work more closely together than the throne of Denmark and your father do. What would you like, Laertes?'